It’s official: 2023 was the hottest year on record, with global temperatures averaging between 1.35 °C and 1.54 °C above preindustrial conditions (1–4), according to the leading projects tracking global temperatures. Given that 1.5 °C was the goal set in the 2015 Paris Agreement, it seems an inauspicious milestone. As the mercury continues to rise, it’s important to be clear about what exactly such milestones mean, while, at the same time, considering the prospects for mitigating further temperature increases.

First, one year with 1.5 °C or so of warming—or one day above 2 °C, as recorded by the European Union’s Copernicus program in mid-November (5)—doesn’t mean we’ve already reached those targets as laid out by the Paris Agreement. When climate scientists refer to targets to limit warming, they mean a sustained period—generally 20 years—during which the global temperature averages 1.5 °C or 2 °C above the years from 1850 to 1900 (6).

More importantly, actions taken by the world’s nations right now can make a big difference in determining which path we take. Current policies, which fall somewhat short of pledges made to cut emissions, have the planet on course to warm by between 2.2 °C and 3.4 °C above preindustrial levels by the end of the century (7). The 1.5 °C Paris goal is likely beyond our grasp, but more aggressive action to cut greenhouse gas emissions could still limit global warming to less than 2 °C. And that would mean a massive reduction in the local consequences of climate change. “Every 10th of a degree matters,” says Katharine Hayhoe, a climate scientist at Texas Tech University in Lubbock and chief scientist with The Nature Conservancy.

To illustrate what different possible climate destinations mean in terms of deadly heat, debilitating droughts, and destructive floods, PNAS Front Matter has created a series of interactive maps and charts using projections compiled by Probable Futures, a nonprofit that aims to help governments, organizations, and people plan for the extremes they are likely to experience in the coming decades. As the maps illustrate, many populations will face multiple stressors, with potentially dire consequences for people, ecosystems, and agriculture. Parts of Pakistan, for instance, face the simultaneous threats of life-threatening heat and disastrous floods.

Probable Futures used a simulation framework called CORDEX-CORE (8), developed by the World Climate Research Programme, to “downscale” the output of global climate models. That essentially means producing local projections for extremes of heat and humidity, drought, and precipitation under different degrees of average global warming (9).

For some years, climate scientists have helped government officials in the world’s richest countries, as well as commercial clients, such as insurance companies, make decisions on the basis of such projections. Probable Futures says it aims to get this crucial information into the hands of decisionmakers and ordinary people across the globe.

